Some 70 years ago, John Cade, an Australian psychiatrist, discovered a medication for bipolar disorder that helped many patients to regain stability swiftly. Lithium is now the standard treatment for the condition, and one of the most consistently effective medicines in psychiatry. But its rise was riddled with obstacles. The intertwined story of Cade and his momentous finding is told in Lithium, a compelling book by US psychiatrist Walter Brown.
Bipolar disorder, labelled manic-depressive illness until 1980, affects around 1 in 100 people globally. Without treatment, it can become a relentless cycle of emotional highs and lows. Suicide rates for untreated people are 10–20 times those in the general population. Fortunately, lithium carbonate — derived from the light, silvery metal lithium — can reduce that figure tenfold.
Brown’s telling of Cade’s eventful life covers much of the same ground as Finding Sanity (2016), a rather hagiographic biography by Greg de Moore and Ann Westmore. What Brown does superbly well is to show that Cade made his discovery without access to advances in technology or to modern facilities — and almost despite them. His finding was the happy result of being forced to work with the simplest of means.
During the Second World War, Cade was interred for more than three years in the notorious Japanese prisoner-of-war camp at Changi in Singapore. He was put in charge of the psychiatric section, where he began to note the decisive link between certain food deficiencies and diseases in his fellow prisoners. A lack of B vitamins, for instance, caused beriberi and pellagra.
After the war, he pursued his investigations. Working from an abandoned pantry in Bundoora Repatriation Mental Hospital near Melbourne, Australia, he began to collect urine samples from people with depression, mania and schizophrenia, aiming to discover whether some secretion in their urine could be correlated to their symptoms. With no access to sophisticated chemical analysis and largely unguided by theory, Cade injected the urine into the abdominal cavities of guinea pigs, raising the dose until they died. The urine of people with mania proved especially lethal to the animals.
In further experiments at Bundoora, Cade found that lithium carbonate — which had been used to treat conditions such as gout since the nineteenth century — reduced the toxicity of patients’ urine. Cade also noticed that a large dose of the medication tended to calm the guinea pigs. He could turn them on their backs, and the normally restive rodents would gaze placidly back at him. He wondered whether lithium could have the same tranquillizing effect on his patients. After trying it out on himself to establish a safe dose, Cade began treating ten people with mania. In September 1949, he reported fast and dramatic improvements in all of them in the Medical Journal of Australia (J. F. J. Cade Med. J. Aus. 2, 349–351; 1949). The majority of these patients had been in and out of Bundoora for years; now, five had improved enough to return to their homes and families.
For years, leaders in the fight against climate change have sought to use international trade as a weapon, pushing world leaders to penalize countries that aren’t stemming warming emissions by restricting trade with them on the global market. But for the most part, the measures have gained little traction.
Last week, that changed. As tens of thousands of fires engulfed the Amazon, the European Union threatened to block a landmark trade deal with Brazil and ban imports of Brazilian beef if the country’s right-wing leader, Jair Bolsonaro, didn’t act. Within days of the threat, and as G-7 leaders prepared to discuss the matter in France, Bolsonaro buckled, abandoning his passive approach to the crisis and sending more than 40,000 troops to fight the fires.
The trade fight over the Amazon represents a little noticed, but important development in the fight against climate change. As countries diverge in their efforts to combat climate change, with some expending significant resources and others ignoring the issue, policymakers are increasingly looking to use trade rules to push others to act and to promote their own low-carbon products.
And in an ironic and unexpected turn of events, it appears that despite taking the U.S out of the international effort to combat climate change, President Trump’s destruction of trade norms may have cleared the way for a powerful new weapon in the fight as countries increasingly crack down on rogue climate counterparts.
The destruction of the Amazon not only threatens to destroy biodiversity and affect the lives of indigenous people but also to rapidly accelerate climate change. The Amazon absorbs carbon dioxide that would otherwise trap heat in the atmosphere. Burning trees releases the heat-trapping gas. And, while fires have burned with the same or greater intensity in the past, scientists warn that the region could be dangerously close to a tipping point that would make it impossible to restore the rainforest and sustain the region’s ability to absorb carbon dioxide.
Bolsanaro has previously questioned the science of climate change, while leaders in the EU have long rejected his position. Around the world, policymakers have sought not only to clean up their own carbon footprints but also to push other countries to act.
But the rate of destruction in the Amazon accelerated those often-subtle diplomatic efforts. In statements in the days leading up to the G-7 summit, France and Ireland both suggested that they might withhold support for a landmark trade deal between the European Union and a handful of South American countries if Bolsanaro did not take the matter seriously. “Under these conditions, France is opposed,” French President Emmanuel Macron’s office said in an Aug. 23 statement.
The deal, known as the European Union–Mercosur Free Trade Agreement, would eliminate the majority of tariffs between the EU and the Mercosur common market, which includes Brazil, Argentina and others. Officials announced a deal in June after two decades of negotiations, but it still requires approval from constituent countries. European Council President Donald Tusk said it was “hard to imagine” the deal going through if Bolsonaro did not take action.
Finland, which currently chairs the Council of the European Union, suggested a different path: restricting Brazilian beef imports. Brazil currently exports 120,000 tonnes of beef annually to the EU, a figure Brazilian producers hope to grow in the coming years. Finland’s finance minister said in a statement late last week that he would raise the possibility of banning Brazilian beef at a meeting with his EU counterparts in September “if progress has not been made before then.”
One important reason countries are willing to wield trade as a weapon, experts say, is that President Trump has normalized saber rattling in world markets. Trump is no friend of climate change measures, but his threats to launch trade wars and impose tariffs on other countries have weakened the international trade regime, making once-anathema measures like tariffs and import restrictions more politically palatable. More directly, his administration has weakened the World Trade Organization, a body that could ordinarily block measures like a ban on imports from a particular country.
“It might be illegal, but it almost doesn’t matter anymore,” says Cosbey, noting that the WTO panel that could overturn a ban on Brazilian beef lacks the members to overrule it because the Trump administration won’t approve them.
In a world where the U.S. and China exchange escalating tariffs affecting goods valued in the hundreds of billions of dollars, it would be easy to write off the threat as small potatoes. Indeed, in the past week the U.S. and China have respectively announced hiked tariffs on $550 billion and $75 billion in goods.
But in the long-term the current trade spat could be overshadowed as countries vie to control the 21st century market for clean energy and low-carbon products. A country that requires its own companies to reduce their emissions will want to punish other countries that have not enacted such measures.
“This market is going to be the dominant market of the world for the rest of this century,” John Kerry, the former U.S. Secretary of State who proposed a border carbon fee as a U.S. senator, told me earlier this year. “If in the United States is not a commanding position in it our economy will suffer tremendously.”
There are hints of this discussion already. Earlier this year, Macron proposed a “carbon tax on borders” for the EU. In the U.S., where climate policy experts are divided on a slew of different measures, a similar idea has gained a wide range of endorsements, from Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders who proposed “a fee on imported Carbon Pollution-Intensive Goods” as part of his presidential campaign to a group of Republican elder statesmen calling for a carbon tax. Legislation that includes such a measure, among other things, has nearly 60 co-sponsors in the House of Representatives.
Trump, who has boasted that trade wars are “good” and “easy to win,” may think climate change is much ado about nothing. He has repeatedly denied the science of climate change when confronted on the topic and on Monday at the G-7 said that he was not going to “lose” the American economy “on dreams” and “windmills.” But at some point in the not-so-distant future, the trade environment he helped create may be a lot harder for the U.S. to navigate, in part because of his denial of the reality of climate change.
A judge in Oklahoma on Monday ruled that Johnson & Johnson had intentionally played down the dangers and oversold the benefits of opioids, and ordered it to pay the state $572 million in the first trial of a drug manufacturer for the destruction wrought by prescription painkillers.
 
The amount fell far short of the $17 billion judgment that Oklahoma had sought to pay for addiction treatment, drug courts and other services it said it would need over the next 20 years to repair the damage done by the opioid epidemic.
Still, the decision, by Judge Thad Balkman of Cleveland County District Court, heartened lawyers representing states and cities — plaintiffs in many of the more than 2,000 opioid lawsuits pending across the country — who are pursuing a legal strategy similar to Oklahoma’s. His finding that Johnson & Johnson had breached the state’s “public nuisance” law was a significant aspect of his order.
Judge Balkman was harsh in his assessment of a company that has built its reputation as a responsible and family-friendly maker of soap, baby powder and Band-Aids.
In his ruling, he wrote that Johnson & Johnson had promulgated “false, misleading, and dangerous marketing campaigns” that had “caused exponentially increasing rates of addiction, overdose deaths” and babies born exposed to opioids.
Sabrina Strong, a lawyer for Johnson & Johnson, one the world’s biggest health care companies, said, “We have many strong grounds for appeal and we intend to pursue those vigorously.”
Johnson & Johnson, which contracted with poppy growers in Tasmania, supplied 60 percent of the opiate ingredients that drug companies used for opioids like oxycodone, the state argued, and aggressively marketed opioids to doctors and patients as safe and effective. A Johnson & Johnson subsidiary, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, made its own opioids — a pill whose rights it sold in 2015, and a fentanyl patch that it still produces.
Judge Balkman said the $572 million judgment could pay for a year’s worth of services needed to combat the epidemic in Oklahoma.
“We would have liked to walk out of here with $17 billion, but we’ve been able to put together a billion dollars,” Oklahoma’s attorney general, Mike Hunter, said at a news conference on Monday. He was referring to the cumulative amount from the Johnson & Johnson judgment and previous settlements with two other drug manufacturers that produce opioids. Earlier this year, Purdue Pharma and Teva Pharmaceuticals agreed to pay $270 million and $85 million, respectively.
Sign up for the Morning Briefing newsletter
As a consequence of the settlements, Oklahoma faced the steep climb of pinning the blame for its opioid crisis mainly on just one defendant.
“We’ve shown that J & J was at the root cause of this opioid crisis,” said Brad Beckworth, the lead attorney for the state. “It made billions of dollars from it over a 20-year period. They’ve always denied responsibility and yet at the same time they say they want to make a difference in solving this problem. So do the right thing: Come in here, pay the judgment.”
The case was also closely watched by some two dozen opioid makers, distributors and retailers that face more than 2,000 similar lawsuits around the country. Also on Monday, the health news website STAT said that the Kentucky Supreme Court let stand an earlier ruling to release documents related to Purdue Pharma’s marketing of the opioid OxyContin. STAT had filed a motion in March 2016 to unseal the documents.
In a statement about the Oklahoma case, Michael Ullmann, the general counsel and executive vice president of Johnson & Johnson, referring to the company’s pharmaceutical subsidiary, said that “Janssen did not cause the opioid crisis in Oklahoma, and neither the facts nor the law support this outcome.
“We recognize the opioid crisis is a tremendously complex public health issue,” he said, “and we have deep sympathy for everyone affected.”
The stocks of Johnson & Johnson and other opioid manufacturers rallied briefly in after-hours trading after the news, perhaps because some had anticipated a judgment of $1 billion or more. Johnson & Johnson stock was up about 4 percent in after-hours trading on Monday evening, and the stocks of Endo International, Mallinckrodt and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries all briefly spiked after the decision, although some fell again.
Oklahoma has suffered mightily from opioids. Mr. Hunter has said that between 2015 and 2018, 18 million opioid prescriptions were written in a state with a population of 3.9 million. Since 2000, his office said, about 6,000 Oklahomans have died from opioid overdoses, with thousands more struggling with addiction.
To calculate the Oklahoma award, Judge Balkman relied on the state’s detailed estimates of what it would cost to remediate the effects of the opioid epidemic. The state said it would need $893 million a year, or about $17 billion over 20 years.
The state’s case was argued by private lawyers whose sense of urgency was driven by personal tragedy — among them, they had seen a son, a business partner and friends succumb to opioids.
On the eve of trial, the lead attorney, Mr. Beckworth, of Austin, Tex., almost dropped out because his wife had just begun chemotherapy for breast cancer, but he said she urged him to stick with the case he “had been born to try.” “If you have an oversupply,” he said in his opening argument, “people will die.”
Reading a summary of his decision in court in Norman, Okla., Judge Balkman said Johnson & Johnson had an outsize impact on the state’s epidemic, though its share of opioid sales was scarcely 1 percent of the market.
“The critical finding is that Johnson & Johnson engaged in false, deceptive and misleading marketing,” said Abbe R. Gluck, who teaches health policy and law at Yale Law School.
From 2000 through 2011, members of Johnson & Johnson’s sales staff made some 150,000 visits to Oklahoma doctors, focusing in particular on high-volume prescribers, the state said. In addition, the pharmaceutical giant supplied most of the nation’s opioid material to other drug manufacturers, refined by one of its companies from a variety of poppy that Johnson & Johnson developed and grew in Tasmania.
Johnson & Johnson, represented by Larry D. Ottaway, an Oklahoma lawyer, argued its case with an eye toward appellate courts. Indeed whether Judge Balkman’s verdict will survive scrutiny is uncertain: State and possibly federal appeals judges may take a skeptical view of the state’s legal theory and the extent of the company’s liability.
During the trial, Johnson & Johnson said blame for the epidemic could not fairly be placed on one company with such modest sales, whose drugs were approved and strictly regulated by state and federal agencies.
Johnson & Johnson said that the state could not show how Oklahoma’s problems, which the company said arose from the diversion of hydrocodone and oxycodone, could be linked to Janssen, which did not make those drugs. It cited black-box warnings on Duragesic, its fentanyl patch, which cautioned about the potential for abuse and addiction. And it said the state had not identified any doctor who had been misled by the company about the dangers of opioids.
But Judge Balkman wrote that he was persuaded by the state’s legal theory. The judge found that Johnson & Johnson perpetuated a “public nuisance,” substantially contributing to an ongoing public health crisis that could take decades to abate.
Public nuisance laws are usually applied in cases where something interferes with a right common to the general public, traditionally roads, waterways or other public areas. Recently, plaintiffs have used the laws to press claims involving lead paint, guns or water or air pollution, with mixed results. Oklahoma’s public nuisance statute is relatively broad, and the state argued that Johnson & Johnson substantially interfered with public health.
Johnson & Johnson’s lawyers contended that the state was contorting public nuisance law to the point of being unrecognizable.
Lawyers representing more than 2,000 cities, counties and other jurisdictions with opioid cases pending in federal court were cheered by Judge Balkman’s ruling. In a statement, they said: “While public nuisance laws differ in every state, this decision is a critical step forward.”
Judge Balkman’s ruling comes only two months before the first federal opioid trial is to begin in Cleveland, brought by two Ohio counties against an array of manufacturers, distributors and pharmacies.
Now that the value of the Oklahoma case has been determined, settlement negotiations may quicken between industry defendants and two large groups of plaintiffs — one, representing thousands of cities and counties, consolidated in federal court in Cleveland, and the other, a coalition of states.
But the nearly two-month Oklahoma trial, which began on May 28, was also singular in some ways. Judge Balkman, an elected jurist and former state legislator, presided over the case. By contrast, much of the forthcoming Ohio trial, which includes other claims, will be heard by a jury.
Also, the pending federal case in Ohio involves numerous defendants, while Oklahoma made its case in court against just Johnson & Johnson.
The level of proof required by the state to back up its allegation that Johnson & Johnson was the “kingpin” of the opioid epidemic required that it demonstrate that the company was responsible for most of the opioid-related damage — from criminal justice to health care, foster care and treatment facilities.
The state said that the company aggressively promoted the safety of opioids generally, through campaigns tailored for women, teenagers and veterans. It said the company engaged with “front groups” of pain patients and pain medicine specialists, who insisted the drugs were effective for quotidian pain and minimized the risk of addiction.
“Judge Balkman has affirmed our position that Johnson & Johnson maliciously and diabolically created the opioid epidemic in our state,” Mr. Hunter said.
Multiple alleged victims of the late financier and convicted sex offender Jeffery Epstein are expected to make statements at a federal court hearing in Manhattan on Tuesday morning, sources with knowledge of the matter told ABC News.
The hearing was set by U.S. District Court Judge Richard Berman to hear one last time from the government and Epstein’s lawyers before the criminal case is officially closed following the multimillionaire's suicide death earlier this month. 
Attorney Brad Edwards, who’s represented multiple Epstein accusers for more than a decade, said he expects it to be a "historic day for crime victims."
(MORE: Jeffrey Epstein signed redrafted will 2 days before jail suicide)
"Eleven years ago, we filed an action under the Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA) because the rights of more than 30 victims of Jeffrey Epstein were violated when they were not given the opportunity to be a part of the process," he said in a statement Monday. "I am proud to say that things have changed, in part because of that case and because of the brave victims who fought for their rights." 
"This case has ended in the most unfortunate way, marking layers of tragedy. However, this hearing has great significance. While it does not provide complete closure, it solidifies the fact that victims are an integral part of the process," he added.
Epstein's estate is estimated to be worth $577.6 million, including about $56.5 million in cash, according to court filings. 
Epstein is accused of sexually assaulting dozens of minor girls at his homes in New York and Florida.
(MORE: Financier Jeffrey Epstein allegedly had 'improper sexual contact' with young women while in 'jail': Lawyer)
He was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center earlier this month. The medical examiner's office said he died of suicide by hanging. 
The 66-year-old ex-financier was being held without bail at the jail, awaiting a trial next year on federal sex trafficking charges involving multiple minors. He faced 45 years in prison if convicted. 
ABC News' James Hill contributed to this report.
Slideshow by Photo Services

Forecasters issued tropical storm warnings for several Caribbean islands as strengthening Tropical Storm Dorian approached the region Monday.
Warning that tropical storm conditions will hit parts of the Windward Islands through Tuesday morning, the National Hurricane Center also said Dorian is expected to become a Category 1 hurricane as it moves near and passes Puerto Rico on Wednesday and eastern Hispaniola after that. 
As of 11 p.m. EDT, Dorian had maximum sustained winds of 50 mph, with higher gusts, the hurricane center said. The storm is expected to bring tropical storm conditions to the Windward Islands, with rain totals of 3 to 8 inches. Strong winds, rough surf and flooding are all possible, AccuWeather said.
Tropical storm warnings are in place for St. Lucia, Martinique, Barbados and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. Dorian, the fourth named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, was centered about 95 miles east-southeast of St. Lucia by 11 p.m., moving west-northwest at 13 mph.
Prime Minister Mia Mottley closed schools and government offices across Barbados as she warned people to remain indoors.
“When you’re dead, you’re dead,” she said in a televised address late Sunday. “Stay inside and get some rest.”
Many of the island's 285,000 residents took heed, among them Fitz Bostic, owner of Rest Haven Beach Cottages, who said he's ready for utility services to be out.
“We have to be very cautious,” he said by phone. “The word ‘storm’ frightens me, man. I’m very nervous.”
Cruise lines sailing out of Port Canaveral, Florida, started rerouting their ships from the eastern to the western Caribbean to avoid the storm.
Forecasters issued a hurricane watch for St. Lucia on Monday, but later downgraded it to a tropical storm warning. St. Lucia Prime Minister Allen Chastanet said everything on the island of nearly 179,000 people would shut down by 6 p.m. Monday.
“We are expecting the worst,” he said.
"Some strengthening is forecast during the next 48 hours, and Dorian is expected to be a hurricane when it moves near Puerto Rico and eastern Hispaniola," the hurricane center said. 
Residents of Puerto Rico, where about 30,000 homes with blue tarps serving as roofs provide a reminder of the devastation caused by Hurricane Maria nearly two years ago, lined up at stores to stock up on supplies such as food, generators and bottled water.
It's still too early to predict whether Dorian will hold together long enough to potentially impact the Bahamas or the mainland U.S., AccuWeather said. However, people in these areas should be keeping a watchful eye on the forecast leading up to Labor Day weekend.
A separate system is also strengthening off the southeast coast of the U.S., and it could become Tropical Storm Erin within the next couple of days. Although it's likely to remain offshore, the storm should still bring strong surf to much of the Atlantic coast this week, AccuWeather said. 
With every trip I take around the sun, I begin to realize more and more that time is the greatest resource in this world. No matter how carefully I plan my days, I always seem to feel like a hamster constantly trying to play catch up with the speed of the wheel. Thus is the burden of the historian.
Research is a tedious process that can easily sap the hours out of a day, especially with the internet at our disposal. While nothing will ever replace the intellectual buffet that is a trip to the local library, the internet offers us some amazing assets for the study of history. That is, if you don’t get caught up in a rabbit hole, which I always seem to do.
On a night last week when I should have been sleeping, I ventured to YouTube to view some old films of Pittsburgh. As rabbit holes go, this one went pretty deep. I spent close to six hours watching amazing 1950s and 1960s home movies of the Steel City during its late-industrial stage. It is fascinating to see the changes that took place during the post-war era, when city leaders began to fear a mass exodus of young people from the area.
Pittsburgh’s metamorphosis came in two waves, known as “Renaissances.” Renaissance I concentrated on the Point, where a century of industry had turned the city’s birthplace into a rusted labyrinth of old rail facilities, crumbling buildings and mountains of litter. It was so bad that even the rats were trying to hitchhike their way out of there.
Pittsburgh needed to grow up, to mature. The only question was, who would lead the charge?
The Moses Plan
Cornelius Scully was a Pittsburgh boy, through and through. Born into the fiery city in 1878, he had spent his youth as a street vendor of newspapers and produce. By the time he reached manhood, Scully had set his eye on a career in public office. His first position was as city solicitor, which was followed by a distinguished run on city council. By the 1930s, he was considered one of the most influential men in Pittsburgh and was ready to ascend to the throne he had craved for so long — the mayor’s office.
The year 1936 could be considered the pivotal point in Pittsburgh’s modern history. The Great Depression had ripped the soul out of the city, and leadership under Mayor William McNair was politically fractured beyond repair. In March, the St. Patrick’s Day flood plunged Pittsburgh into absolute chaos. Unable to regain the trust of the people, McNair resigned. As city council leader, Cornelius Scully was sworn in to replace him.
Scully’s main goal upon becoming mayor was to clean up the city. He immediately put funding into the creation of new public parks, razing of old properties,and improvement of the city’s water system. All of that was put on hold when the American war machine geared up in the late-1930s. Pittsburgh once again assumed its role as our nation’s supplier of wartime steel. The economy quickly rebounded as mills operated 24/7 and thousands of new jobs were created in private industry.
Even in the midst of a potential war, Scully’s mind for environmental reforms kept working overtime. In 1938, he turned his attention to the tip of the Golden Triangle, where the Pennsylvania Railroad had centered its nationwide shipping enterprise for the past fifty years. Surrounding the railroad’s freight yard and warehouses was a commercial slum, the first thing motorists saw as they entered the city from both the Point and Manchester bridges.
Scully’s plan for the Point was simple — level the entire thing. To accomplish this and his future redevelopment plans, the mayor hired master builder Robert Moses, the man considered most responsible for New York City’s urban planning success during the 1920s.
The “Moses Plan” could be best described as comprehensive. With a price tag of $38 million, it would be the single-largest urban development plan in American history. It included several parkways, a crosstown highway, and reconstruction of Duquesne Way, Saw Mill Run Boulevard and the Liberty Tubes portals. The city would also remove the Wabash Railroad bridge and station, the Baltimore & Ohio station and over two hundred buildings that were in the way of the new roads.
In October 1940, Mayor Scully unveiled the plans for the crown jewel of his tenure — Point State Park. The final 13 acres of needed land were purchased from the Pennsylvania Railroad, and the Point Park Commission was formed. In February 1942, archeologists working at the Point uncovered the original curtain of Fort Pitt. This find immediately brought state funding to the table, formally granting the go-ahead for the new Point State Park. However, it would be nearly thirty years before the park was finally completed.
Scully would continue on as mayor until 1946. During his tenure, the city made amazing strides toward a brighter future. Unfortunately, and perhaps unfairly, it would be his successor who would reap the accolades as Pittsburgh’s 20th century guiding hand.
Renaissance I
When you think of names associated with Pittsburgh, David L. Lawrence is pretty high on the list. Born into a tough, working-class Irish family, he was raised only steps from the former site of Fort Pitt. With no money to attend college, Lawrence obtained a job as a clerk for attorney William Brennan, who also served as chairman of the local Democratic Party. After serving in World War I, Lawrence returned to Pittsburgh and began a career in public service.

Lawrence’s blue collar background endeared him to the people of Pittsburgh. He served in several Democratic Party positions between 1919 and 1932, working on campaigns for national candidates. He lost his bid for Allegheny County commissioner in 1931, but was respected enough by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to be appointed as U.S. Collector of Internal Revenue. In 1934, Lawrence was named state chairman of the Democratic Party. These positions gained him enough clout to run for mayor in 1945, an election he won by a slim margin.
Once Lawrence became mayor, his popularity skyrocketed. He was elected to an unprecedented four terms, from 1946 to 1959. During this time, he built upon Mayor Scully’s plans to bring Pittsburgh into the modern era. His partnership with Richard Mellon, chairman of Mellon Bank, helped create the first official urban renewal plan for the city, known as Renaissance I.
Part of President Harry S. Truman’s “Fair Deal” initiative, the Housing Act of 1949 provided the financial capital for Lawrence’s new plan. Between 1949 and 1953, virtually the entire Golden Triangle was razed to make way for new buildings. More controversial developments took place in the lower Hill District, where 95 acres of mostly residential property were claimed via eminent domain. This move unfairly impacted African-American families and small businesses, who saw their neighborhood destroyed to make way for the new Civic Arena and a phantom cultural center that was never built.
Next to the developing Point, the Gateway Center project got underway in May 1950. New York-based Equitable Life Assurance Society purchased 23 acres to build a series of stainless-steel office buildings. In 1952, the first three Gateway Center buildings opened, followed by the new Hilton Hotel in 1960. Gateway Center also gave Pittsburgh its first fully underground parking garage, creating more space above ground for construction.
Other projects completed during Renaissance I were the Alcoa Building, the original U.S. Steel building (now the Citizens Bank Tower), Mellon Square Plaza, the Fort Pitt Tunnels and Bridge, and the Fort Duquesne Bridge.
Renaissance I was not a complete success, however. Along with the Hill District, East Liberty was also impacted negatively by redevelopment. Over 125 acres of the neighborhood was razed to build three 20-story apartment buildings and a very unpopular road system that continues to bewilder motorists to this day. East Liberty, once a bustling commercial district, lost over 90% of its businesses by 1980.
On the North Side, preservation efforts helped to save many historic places. The Mexican War Streets, Manchester and Allegheny West remain today thanks to the work of local historical societies. The heart of old Allegheny City wasn’t so lucky, with all but a handful of structures razed to build Allegheny Center Mall. Only the old post office, the Carnegie Library and the Buhl Planetarium were salvaged.

The final project of Renaissance I was perhaps the most anticipated. In 1968, ground was broken for a new multipurpose sports stadium on the North Side. Known as Three Rivers Stadium, it would open in June 1970 at a cost of $55 million.
Renaissance II
By 1970, Pittsburgh had seen so many changes that residents could barely recognize their own city. One last project was yet to be completed, however.
Point State Park had been the dream of Mayor Scully more than thirty years prior, but numerous other priorities robbed the project of its steam during the 1950s and 1960s. In 1969, the park was nearly complete, but still had the twin Point and Manchester Bridges pouring traffic through it. Both bridges were finally removed in late-1970, allowing for the park to rise in its final form.
In 1972, the iconic fountain was built, followed by two years of grading and landscaping to transform the former industrial property into the majestic showcase it is today. On August 30, 1974, 45 years ago this week, Point State Park was officially dedicated in an elaborate ceremony.
The second phase of redevelopment began in earnest during this same period. The U.S. Steel building, the tallest skyscraper in Pittsburgh, was completed in 1970. The 64-floor tower was built of Cor-ten steel, which requires little maintenance due to its corrosion-resistant finish. The building was a symbol of Pittsburgh’s steel roots and continues to define the skyline today. It is currently home to the headquarters of UPMC.
The mid-1970s began the dark years for the region and its largest city. Between 1974 and 1985, the Pittsburgh area lost more than 300,000 industrial jobs, once again causing the city to redefine itself. As mills were shuttered and torn down, this left the city something it had not had in decades — room to grow.

In 1977, then-Mayor Richard Caliguiri coined the term Renaissance II to describe the next chapter in the city’s history. This time, redevelopment was centered on the downtown area and transportation improvements. Notably, this would be the beginning of the Pittsburgh Light Rail System, known lovingly as the “T.”
Pittsburgh had been a trolley town since 1902, when the Pittsburgh Railways system was chartered. By the 1950s, the city’s streetcar fleet was second in size to only Chicago, domestically. When the Port Authority took control of Pittsburgh Railways in 1963, it had plans to scrap the entire network in favor of Westinghouse’s revolutionary “Skybus” system. Plans called for an automated 92-mile network that would extend to Greater Pittsburgh International Airport, Kennywood Park and other destinations.
As it turned out, the Skybus just wasn’t economically viable. A greatly increased system of bus routes was chosen instead, with only the southern suburbs retaining streetcar service. A $265 million federal grant was procured to fund a new downtown subway that would connect with the remaining streetcar routes. The new combined system was opened as the “T” in July 1985.
Another project taking place during this same period was the construction of PPG Place, a six-building complex that has become one of Pittsburgh’s defining features. Nicknamed the “Glass Palace,” it combines medieval-style architecture with the modern elements of glass and steel. PPG Place’s main tower was completed in 1983 and dedicated in April 1984.
Meanwhile, more skyscrapers were taking shape. In 1983, the 54-story One Mellon Center was completed. It is the second tallest building in the city today. That same year, the 46-story One Oxford Center was also dedicated. Consisting of four inter-connected octagonal towers, it has the most corner offices in the city. A twin building to One Oxford Center was planned, but never materialized.
The final Renaissance II project was Fifth Avenue Place, which was completed in 1988. While the 31-story building adds a unique look to the city skyline, its construction required the removal of the historic Jenkins Arcade. This fact makes the relationship between Fifth Avenue Place and Pittsburghers bittersweet.
Today, Pittsburgh is a completely different city than it was during its peak as America’s steel hub. The thousands of people who commute into the city today are doing so to work in technology and health care jobs instead of at mills. It could be argued that Pittsburgh’s renewal over the past 75 years is one of its most historic qualities.
It was just an appetizer, but consider our appetite properly whetted.
The college football season started last weekend and it was no surprise that ... it was chock-full of surprises.
A highly ranked Florida team fell flat on offense, prompting Gainesville Sun columnist Pat Dooley to say of Feleipe Franks, “the quarterback you thought was going to be great ... was awful.” Still, the Gators snuck by a scrappy Miami squad, 24-20, and the ol’ phrase insists you can’t win championships in Week Zero, but you certainly can lose them. Errrr, something like that.
Meanwhile, the bar for fantastic finishes has already been set extremely high, as Hawaii held on for dear life by tackling Arizona quarterback Khalil Tate on the final play of the game en route to a thrilling 45-38 win.
THE POLL
The next AP poll doesn’t officially come out until after the first official weekend of games — which starts on Thursday — but suffice it to say No. 8 Florida will need others to struggle to hold its spot. Here’s a link to the current AP poll, which has Clemson, Alabama and Georgia at the top.
Arizona was getting a single vote in the preseason poll and will likely lose that, while Hawaii had not been receiving votes.
THE STARS
If you stayed up late, you saw Hawaii receiver Cedric Byrd II score four times in the win over the Wildcats, prompting second-year Arizona head coach Kevin Sumlin to say of Byrd, “he just ran right by us.” Byrd finished with 224 receiving yards while quarterback Cole McDonald threw his hat in the ring for the Gardner Minshew Award — OK, we made that one up — as a guy who could emerge from virtual anonymity into a legit Heisman candidate. McDonald had 378 yards through the air and in case you didn’t know, last year he finished the season with 36 passing touchdowns while playing with an injured MCL. Imagine what he might do if he’s completely healthy this season.

We’d like to nominate someone as a star from the Florida-Miami game, but this one isn’t as easy. How about Florida punter Tommy Townsend, who hustled to execute a fake punt early on that led to the first TD of the contest. The fact that we’re nominating the punter as one of the stars of the game says something, right?
THE WEEK AHEAD
There aren’t a ton of big games on tap for this weekend, but Oregon vs. Auburn at Jerry World certainly has to get your juices flowing.
Oregon (11) vs. Auburn (16) in Arlington, Tex., (Saturday, 7:30 p.m. ET): Auburn will start true freshman Bo Nix at quarterback, but there’s some lineage here — his father, Patrick, played the position at Auburn in the 1990s. One of the keys to this contest will be the highly touted Oregon offensive line against an equally lauded Auburn defensive front.
Houston at Oklahoma (4), (Sunday, 7:30 p.m. ET): The story is all Jalen Hurts, right? The former Alabama QB makes his debut for the Sooners and will be the focus of much of the attention in this ABC spotlight game. But here’s a stat: Houston quarterback D’Eriq King led the nation last season with 27.5 points responsible for per game. The player just behind him? Heisman winner Kyler Murray.
Florida Atlantic at Ohio State (5), (Saturday, noon ET): This shouldn’t be close, but there are plenty of interesting stories to follow, like Justin Fields’ first game as a Buckeye and FAU coach Lane Kiffin’s plans to stop him.
Sanders is the second 2020 Democratic candidate publicly supported by a national labor union; the International Association of Fire Fighters endorsed former Vice President Joe Biden earlier this year.
During his speech at downtown Pittsburgh’s Wyndham Grand Hotel, Sanders told hundreds of local workers his plans to protect middle-class families and tackle corporate greed.
“We can have a nation where all of our people live with security and dignity,” he said. “We can have a nation which does not have a huge gap between the very rich and everybody else, where income and wealth inequality is growing ...”
Union leadership said Sanders has been a longtime supporter of workplace actions, including a nine-day strike in Erie earlier this year involving 1,700 locomotive plant workers.
“Bernie understands the need for workers to have a democratic, independent union movement that is unafraid to challenge corporate America’s stranglehold on our economy,” said UE General President Peter Knowlton a statement. The union also supports Sanders’ plans to expand organized labor, end right-to-work laws and implement “Medicare for All.”
The UE represents about 35,000 workers across a variety of sectors, including Beaver County residents working throughout the state, a spokesperson for UE said. Other unions with ties to the region have yet to endorse a candidate.
“It’s got to mean something in a labor-heavy county like Beaver,” said Greg Harmon, a building contractor from Beaver Falls. “We have a lot of union voters here.”
It’s unclear if the endorsement will boost local support for Sanders; President Donald Trump’s focus on blue-collar workers helped him win Beaver County by more than 18 percentage points in 2016 — although he won Pennsylvania by fewer than 43,000 votes.
Recent campaign finance reports also indicate Sanders has more unique Pittsburgh-area donors than other Democratic candidates.
“Our fight is about the need for an economy that works for all Americans and not just the one percent,” Sanders said about the endorsement. “And we are going to win that fight together.”
As Rebich embarks on his third year as coach, the construction process is not only running on time — it might be ahead of schedule.
“When I had my interview, I said that this is a three-year project, just based off of the program’s history,” Rebich said. “But with the skill that we have now coming up and with what we have returning, this is right where I want to be, if not a little bit better than what I was envisioning.”
Blackhawk won its first WPIAL playoff game in Rebich’s first year, then followed that up with a 12-3-2 record last year. Though the Cougars lost in the first round, Rebich saw progress as Blackhawk stayed competitive with section foes Moon and eventual state champion West Allegheny, handing the Indians their only loss.
“Every game that every team played could have gone either way,” Rebich said. “That’s kind of the beauty of it, in a sense, but it’s also the scary thing. It’s anybody’s section.”
In some respects, there might be pressure to push deeper into the playoffs. Blackhawk sees it more as an opportunity waiting to be seized.
“I wouldn’t say there’s necessarily pressure,” senior center back Dylan Thomas said. “I think it just gives us more motivation to get further in.”
The core of Blackhawk’s recent success has centered on its defense. Blackhawk allowed just eight goals last season thanks to a stingy back line and Ethan Burawa’s presence in net. Burawa graduated, but Matt Adler will take over after taking a year off.
“It seems like he got a lot stronger, a lot faster,” Rebich said. “His reaction times are fantastic.”

Adler has plenty of experience in front of him, too, as all four starters return on defense. Thomas and fellow senior center back Andrew Bollinger will be flanked by Noah Dworakowski and Justin Zubroski. Even the center of Blackhawk’s structure has experience, as defensive midfielder Logan Corradi and center mid Logan Gonzalez rarely left the field last season.
“We have the entire back four coming back, and then Corradi is the CDM, so everything in the back is solid,” Bollinger said. “Once we get the ball up front, we’ve just got to put it in the back of the net.”
The last two years have been crucial for Blackhawk’s psyche. This is a program that once went 16-0-1 in the regular season, only to lose 1-0 in the first round of the WPIAL playoffs. Now, they believe they can win again.
“It’s helped us realize that if we work hard enough and put enough passion into it, we can play with anyone in the WPIAL,” Gonzalez said.
AROUND THE VALLEY
West Allegheny is tasked with defending its state title. The Indians lost just two games last year – including a 1-0 setback in the WPIAL final to Franklin Regional. West Allegheny has to replace Times’ Player of the Year Nathan Dragisich as well as seven other seniors....Moon reached the playoffs last year thanks to a strong junior class. Now seniors, players like Justin Kopay, Darek Panucci, Ian Cueto, Viktor Korzilius and others will form the backbone of a WPIAL push....Ambridge just missed the playoffs last year, but the Bridgers had a young team that got plenty of experience....Beaver struggled in its first year in Class 3A and will have to replace a large senior class, though the Bobcats do have junior goalie Tyler Haczela back.
Quaker Valley, the WPIAL runner-up in 2018 and a state champion two years ago, is always in the mix. The Quakers lost 10 seniors but have twins Fritz and Dom Reiter back. Dom Reiter recently committed to Pitt....Freedom had to rebuild last season after an outstanding 2017 campaign, but the Bulldogs still managed to get into the playoffs....Central Valley lost its first five games last season, then won four of its next five. The Warriors will search for some consistency in 2019 to try and get into the postseason again...In playoff position for much of the season, South Side faded down the stretch with a 1-5-1 record in its final seven games....Hopewell and New Brighton have work to do to be playoff contenders after going 3-12-1 and 0-11-2 in 2018.
Sewickley won the section title last season, but the Panthers have to rebuild a defensive structure that posted 11 shutouts last season. Goalkeeper Nick Wilson and a core of midfielders return as starters....Riverside and OLSH figure to be Sewickly’s prime contenders for a section title, as Riverside is coming off a 10-5-1 season while OLSH went 11-5-1....BCCS has had success in the past, but the Eagles have struggled of late. Last year was the seventh time in the past eight years that BCCS had a losing record and missed the playoffs....Quigley missed the playoffs last year for the first time since 2015.
MANY YEARS LATER as he faced the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was to remember that distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. At that time Macondo was a village of twenty adobe houses, built on the bank of a river of clear water that ran along a bed of polished stones, which were white and enormous, like prehistoric eggs. The world was so recent that many things lacked names, and in order to indicate them it was necessary to point. Every year during the month of March a family of ragged gypsies would set up their tents near the village, and with a great uproar of pipes and kettledrums they would display new inventions. First they brought the magnet. A heavy gypsy with an untamed beard and sparrow hands, who introduced himself as Melquíades, put on a bold public demonstration he himself called the eighth wonder of the learned alchemists of Macedonia. He went from house to house dragging two metal ingots and everybody was amazed to see pots, pans, tongs, and braziers tumble down from their places and beams creak from the desperation of nails and screws trying to emerge, and even objects that had been lost for a long time appeared from where they had been searched for most and went dragging along in turbulent confusion behind Melquíades' magical irons. "Things have a life of their own," the gypsy proclaimed with a harsh accent. "It's simply a matter of waking up their souls." José Arcadio Buendía, whose unbridled imagination always went beyond the genius of nature and even beyond miracles and magic, thought that it would be possible to make use of that useless invention to extract gold from the bowels of the earth. Melquíades, who was an honest man, warned him: "It won't work for that." But José Arcadio Buendía at that time did not believe in the honesty of gypsies, so he traded his mule and a pair of goats for the two magnetized ingots. úrsula Iguarán, his wife, who relied on those animals to increase their poor domestic holdings, was unable to dissuade him. "Very soon well have gold enough and more to pave the floors of the house," her husband replied. For several months he worked hard to demonstrate the truth of his idea. He explored every inch of the region, even the riverbed, dragging the two iron ingots along and reciting Melquíades' incantation aloud. The only thing he succeeded in doing was to unearth a suit fifteenth-century armor which had all of its pieces soldered together with rust and inside of which there was the hollow resonance of an enormous stone-filled gourd. When José Arcadio Buendía and the four men of his expedition managed to take the armor apart, they found inside a calcified skeleton with a copper locket containing a woman's hair around its neck.
In March the gypsies returned. This time they brought a telescope and a magnifying glass the size of a drum, which they exhibited as the latest discovery of the Jews of Amsterdam. They placed a gypsy woman at one end of the village and set up the telescope at the entrance to the tent. For the price of five reales, people could look into the telescope see the gypsy woman an arm's length away. "Science has eliminated distance," Melquíades proclaimed. "In a short time, man will be able to see what is happening in any place in the world without leaving his own house." A burning noonday sun brought out a startling demonstration with the gigantic magnifying glass: they put a pile of dry hay in the middle of the street and set it on fire by concentrating the sun's rays. José Arcadio Buendía, who had still not been consoled for the failure of big magnets, conceived the idea of using that invention as a weapon of war. Again Melquíades tried to dissuade him, but he finally accepted the two magnetized ingots and three colonial coins in exchange for the magnifying glass. úrsula wept in consternation. That money was from a chest of gold coins that her father had put together ova an entire life of privation and that she had buried underneath her bed in hopes of a proper occasion to make use of it. José Arcadio Buendía made no at. tempt to console her, completely absorbed in his tactical experiments with the abnegation of a scientist and even at the risk of his own life. In an attempt to show the effects of the glass on enemy troops, he exposed himself to the concentration of the sun's rays and suffered burns which turned into sores that took a long time to heal.
Over the protests of his wife, who was alarmed at such a dangerous invention, at one point he was ready to set the house on fire. He would spend hours on end in his room, calculating the strategic possibilities of his novel weapon until he succeeded in putting together a manual of startling instructional clarity and an irresistible power of conviction. He sent it to the government, accompanied by numerous descriptions of his experiments and several pages of explanatory sketches; by a messenger who crossed the mountains, got lost in measureless swamps, forded stormy rivers, and was on the point of perishing under the lash of despair, plague, and wild beasts until he found a route that joined the one used by the mules that carried the mail. In spite of the fact that a trip to the capital was little less than impossible at that time, José Arcadio Buendía promised to undertake it as soon as the government ordered him to so that he could put on some practical demonstrations of his invention for the military authorities and could train them himself in the complicated art of solar war. For several years he waited for an answer. Finally, tired of waiting, he bemoaned to Melquíades the failure of his project and the gypsy then gave him a convincing proof of his honesty: he gave him back the doubloons in exchange for the magnifying glass, and he left him in addition some Portuguese maps and several instruments of navigation. In his own handwriting he set down a concise synthesis of the studies by Monk Hermann. which he left José Arcadio so that he would be able to make use of the astrolabe, the compass, and the sextant. José Arcadio Buendía spent the long months of the rainy season shut up in a small room that he had built in the rear the house so that no one would disturb his experiments. Having completely abandoned his domestic obligations, he spent entire nights in the courtyard watching the course of the stars and he almost contracted sunstroke from trying to establish an exact method to ascertain noon. When he became an expert in the use and manipulation of his instruments, he conceived a notion of space that allowed him to navigate across unknown seas, to visit uninhabited territories, and to establish relations with splendid beings without having to leave his study. That was the period in which he acquired the habit of talking to himself, of walking through the house without paying attention to anyone, as úrsula and the children broke their backs in the garden, growing banana and caladium, cassava and yams, ahuyama roots and eggplants. Suddenly, without warning, his feverish activity was interrupted and was replaced by a kind of fascination. He spent several days as if he were bewitched, softly repeating to himself a string of fearful conjectures without giving credit to his own understanding. Finally, one Tuesday in December, at lunchtime, all at once he released the whole weight of his torment. The children would remember for the rest of their lives the august solemnity with which their father, devastated by his prolonged vigil and by the wrath of his imagination, revealed his discovery to them:"The earth is round, like an orange."
úrsula lost her patience. "If you have to go crazy, please go crazy all by yourself!" she shouted. "But don't try to put your gypsy ideas into the heads of the children." José Arcadio Buendía, impassive, did not let himself be frightened by the desperation of his wife, who, in a seizure of rage, mashed the astrolabe against the floor. He built another one, he gathered the men of the village in his little room, and he demonstrated to them, with theories that none of them could understand, the possibility of returning to where one had set out by consistently sailing east. The whole village was convinced that José Arcadio Buendía had lost his reason, when Melquíades returned to set things straight. He gave public praise to the intelligence of a man who from pure astronomical speculation had evolved a theory that had already been proved in practice, although unknown in Macondo until then, and as a proof of his admiration he made him a gift that was to have a profound influence on the future of the village: the laboratory of an alchemist.
By then Melquíades had aged with surprising rapidity. On his first trips he seemed to be the same age as José Arcadio Buendía. But while the latter had preserved his extraordinary strength, which permitted him to pull down a horse by grabbing its ears, the gypsy seemed to have been worn dowse by some tenacious illness. It was, in reality, the result of multiple and rare diseases contracted on his innumerable trips around the world. According to what he himself said as he spoke to José Arcadio Buendía while helping him set up the laboratory, death followed him everywhere, sniffing at the cuffs of his pants, but never deciding to give him the final clutch of its claws. He was a fugitive from all the plagues and catastrophes that had ever lashed mankind. He had survived pellagra in Persia, scurvy in the Malayan archipelago, leprosy in Alexandria, beriberi in Japan, bubonic plague in Madagascar, an earthquake in Sicily, and a disastrous shipwreck in the Strait of Magellan. That prodigious creature, said to possess the keys of Nostradamus, was a gloomy man, enveloped in a sad aura, with an Asiatic look that seemed to know what there was on the other side of things. He wore a large black hat that looked like a raven with widespread wings, and a velvet vest across which the patina of the centuries had skated. But in spite of his immense wisdom and his mysterious breadth, he had a human burden, an earthly condition that kept him involved in the small problems of daily life. He would complain of the ailments of old age, he suffered from the most insignificant economic difficulties, and he had stopped laughing a long time back because scurvy had made his teeth drop out. On that suffocating noontime when the gypsy revealed his secrets, José Arcadio Buendía had the certainty that it was the beginning of a great friendship. The children were startled by his fantastic stories. Aureliano, who could not have been more than five at the time, would remember him for the rest of his life as he saw him that afternoon, sitting against the metallic and quivering light from the window, lighting up with his deep organ voice the darkest reaches of the imagination, while down over his temples there flowed the grease that was being melted by the heat. José Arcadio, his older brother, would pass on that wonderful image as a hereditary memory to all of his descendants. úrsula on the other hand, held a bad memory of that visit, for she had entered the room just as Melquíades had carelessly broken a flask of bichloride of mercury.
"It's the smell of the devil," she said.
"Not at all," Melquíades corrected her. "It has been proven that the devil has sulphuric properties and this is just a little corrosive sublimate."
Always didactic, he went into a learned exposition of the diabolical properties of cinnabar, but úrsula paid no attention to him, although she took the children off to pray. That biting odor would stay forever in her mind linked to the memory of Melquíades.
At first Jose Arcadio Buendía had been a kind of youthful patriarch who would give instructions for planting and advice for the raising of children and animals, and who collaborated with everyone, even in the physical work, for the welfare of the community. Since his house from the very first had been the best in the village, the others had been built in its image and likeness. It had a small, well-lighted living roost, a dining room in the shape of a terrace gaily colored flowers, two bedrooms, a courtyard with a gigantic chestnut tree, a well kept garden, and a corral where goats, pigs, and hens lived in peaceful communion. The only animals that were prohibited, not just in his house but in the entire settlement, were fighting cocks.
úrsula's capacity for work was the same as that of her husband. Active, small, severe, that woman of unbreakable nerves who at no moment in her life had been heard to sing seemed to be everywhere, from dawn until quite late at night, always pursued by the soft whispering stiff, starched petticoats. Thanks to her the floors of tamped earth, the unwhitewashed mud walls, the rustic, wooden furniture they had built themselves were always dean, and the old chests where they kept their clothes exhaled the warm smell of basil.
José Arcadio Buendía, who was the most enterprising man ever to be seen in the village, had set up the placement of the houses in such a way that from all of them one could reach the river and draw water with the same effort, and he had lined up the streets with such good sense that no house got more sun than another during the hot time of day. Within a few years Macondo was a village that was more orderly and hard working than any known until then by its three hundred inhabitants. It was a truly happy village where no one was over thirty years of age and where no one had died.
Since the time of its founding, José Arcadio Buendía had built traps and cages. In a short time he filled not only his own house but all of those in the village with troupials, canaries, bee eaters, and redbreasts. The concert of so many different birds became so disturbing that úrsula would plug her ears with beeswax so as not to lose her sense of reality. The first time that Melquíades' tribe arrived, selling glass balls for headaches, everyone was surprised that they had been able to find that village lost in the drowsiness of the swamp, and the gypsies confessed that they had found their way by the song of the birds.
That spirit of social initiative disappeared in a short time, pulled away by the fever of the magnets, the astronomical calculations, the dreams transmutation, the urge to discover the wonders of the world. From a clean and active man, José Arcadio Buendía changed into a man lazy in appearance, careless in his dress, with a wild beard that úrsula managed to trim great effort and a kitchen knife. There were many who considered him the victim of some strange spell. But even those most convinced of his madness left work family to follow him when he brought out his tools to clear the land and asked the assembled group to open a way that would put Macondo in contact with the great inventions.
José Arcadio Buendía was completely ignorant of the geography of the region. He knew that to the east there lay an impenetrable mountain chain and that on the other side of the mountains there was the ardent city of Riohacha, where in times past-according to what he had been told by the first Aureliano Buendía, his grandfather-Sir Francis Drake had gone crocodile hunting with cannons and that he repaired hem and stuffed them with straw to bring to Queen Elizabeth. In his youth, José Arcadio Buendía and his men, with wives and children, animals and all kinds of domestic implements, had crossed the mountains in search of an outlet to the sea, and after twenty-six months they gave up the expedition and founded Macondo, so they would not have to go back. It was, therefore, a route that did not interest him, for it could lead only to the past. To the south lay the swamps, covered with an eternal vegetable scum and the whole vast universe of the great swamp, which, according to what the gypsies said, had no limits. The great swamp in the west mingled a boundless extension of water where there were soft-skinned cetaceans that had the head and torso of a woman, causing the ruination of sailors with the charm of their extraordinary breasts. The gypsies sailed along that route for six months before they reached the strip of land over which the mules that carried the mail passed. According to José Arcadio Buendía's calculations, the only possibility contact with civilization lay along the northern route. So he handed out clearing tools and hunting weapons to the same men who had been with him during the founding of Macondo. He threw his directional instruments and his maps into a knapsack, and he undertook the reckless adventure.
During the first days they did not come across any appreciable obstacle. They went down along the stony bank of the river to the place where years before they had found the soldier's armor, and from there they went into the woods along a path between wild orange trees. At the end of the first week they killed and roasted a deer, but they agreed to eat only half of it and salt the rest for the days that lay ahead. With that precaution they tried to postpone the necessity of having to eat macaws, whose blue flesh had a harsh and musky taste. Then, for more than ten days, they did not see the sun again. The ground became soft and damp, like volcanic ash, and the vegetation was thicker and thicker, and the cries of the birds and the uproar of the monkeys became more more remote, and the world became eternally sad. The men on the expedition felt overwhelmed by their most ancient memories in that paradise of dampness and silence, going back to before original sin, as their boots sank into pools of steaming oil and their machetes destroyed bloody lilies and golden salamanders. For a week, almost without speaking, they went ahead like sleepwalkers through a universe of grief, lighted only by the tenuous reflection of luminous insects, and their lungs were overwhelmed by a suffocating smell of blood. They could not return because the strip that they were opening as they went along would soon close up with a new vegetation that. almost seemed to grow before their eyes. "It's all right," José Arcadio Buendía would say. "The main thing is not to lose our bearings." Always following his compass, he kept on guiding his men toward the invisible north so that they would be able to get out of that enchanted region. It was a thick night, starless, but the darkness was becoming impregnated with a fresh and clear air. Exhausted by the long crossing, they hung up their hammocks and slept deeply for the first time in two weeks. When they woke up, with the sun already high in the sky, they were speechless with fascination. Before them, surrounded by ferns and palm trees, white and powdery in the silent morning light, was an enormous Spanish galleon. Tilted slightly to the starboard, it had hanging from its intact masts the dirty rags of its sails in the midst of its rigging, which was adorned with orchids. The hull, covered with an armor of petrified barnacles and soft moss, was firmly fastened into a surface stones. The whole structure seemed to occupy its own space, one of solitude and oblivion, protected from the vices of time and the habits of the birds. Inside, where the expeditionaries explored with careful intent, there was nothing but a thick forest of flowers.
The discovery of the galleon, an indication of the proximity of the sea, broke José Arcadio Buendía's drive. He considered it a trick of his whimsical fate to have searched for the sea without finding it, at the cost of countless sacrifices and suffering, and to have found it all of a sudden without looking for it, as if it lay across his path like an insurmountable object. Many years later Colonel Aureliano Buendía crossed the region again, when it was already a regular mail route, and the only part of the ship he found was its burned-out frame in the midst of a field of poppies. Only then, convinced that the story had not been some product of his father's imagination, did he wonder how the galleon had been able to get inland to that spot. But José Arcadio Buendía did not concern himself with that when he found the sea after another four days' journey from the galleon. His dreams ended as he faced that ashen, foamy, dirty sea, which had not merited the risks and sacrifices of the adventure.
"God damn it!" he shouted. "Macondo is surrounded by water on all sides."
The idea of a peninsular Macondo prevailed for a long time, inspired by the arbitrary map that José Arcadio Buendía sketched on his return from the expedition. He drew it in rage, evilly, exaggerating the difficulties communication, as if to punish himself for the absolute lack of sense with which he had chosen the place. "We'll never get anywhere," he lamented to úrsula. "We're going to rot our lives away here without receiving the benefits of science." That certainty, mulled over for several months in the small room he used as his laboratory, brought him to the conception of the plan to move Maeondo to a better place. But that time úrsula had anticipated his feverish designs. With the secret and implacable labor of a small ant she predisposed the women of the village against the flightiness of their husbands, who were already preparing for the move. José Arcadio Buendía did not know at what moment or because of what adverse forces his plan had become enveloped in a web of pretexts, disappointments, and evasions until it turned into nothing but an illusion. úrsula watched him with innocent attention and even felt some pity for him on the morning when she found him in the back room muttering about his plans for moving as he placed his laboratory pieces in their original boxes. She let him finish. She let him nail up the boxes and put his initials on them with an inked brush, without reproaching him, but knowing now that he knew (because she had heard him say so in his soft monologues) that the men of the village would not back him up in his undertaking. Only when he began to take down the door of the room did úrsula dare ask him what he was doing, and he answered with a certain bitterness. "Since no one wants to leave, we'll leave all by ourselves." úrsula did not become upset.